Universal masking, immunization top 2 strategies for safe in-person school: AAP
 Disclaimer Advertising 
Editors note: For the latest news on COVID-19, visit https://bit.ly/AAPNewsCOVID-19.
Schools need to take a multipronged, layered approach to reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission among students, teachers and staff so that in-person learning is safe and possible. As part of that approach, universal masking and immunizations are the most important risk mitigation strategies.
These recommendations are included in the AAPs updated COVID-19 Guidance for Safe Schools and Promotion of In-Person Learning. The interim guidance is designed to help support communities, local education and public health leaders, and pediatricians who collaborate with schools.
All local, state and federal policy considerations for school COVID-19 plans should start with a goal of keeping students safe, physically present and emotionally supported in school, the guidance states.
Maximizing protections
Besides masking and vaccination, layers of protection include physical distancing, ventilation when resources are available, screening, testing, handwashing, staying home and getting tested when sick, contact tracing, isolation and quarantining.
There must be a continued focus on keeping students safe particularly because not all students have had the opportunity or are eligible to be vaccinated against COVID-19 at this time, the guidance states.
Included in the updated guidance are new and expanded sections on school ventilation systems, COVID testing, oral health and evidence for universal masking. The use of plastic dividers or desk shields in the classroom no longer is recommended and, in some cases, can be detrimental for infection control.
There is continued emphasis on supporting the behavioral/mental health of students and staff. Schools are fundamental to child and adolescent development and can play a critical role in addressing racial and social inequity. The guidance discusses the impact school closures have had on racial and ethnic groups and populations facing inequities.
Key principles
Schools should consider following these key principles to mitigate risk during the pandemic:
Importance of indoor mask-wearing
The AAP recommends masking for the following reasons:
Special considerations 
The guidance also covers issues of school attendance and absenteeism; students with disabilities or chronic illnesses; adult staff and educators; onsite school-based health services; and the importance of getting caught up on other immunizations  especially influenza  and screenings. Also covered are food and housing insecurity, the digital divide and organized activities.
Evidence to support safe return to classrooms continues to evolve, and the AAP regularly reviews and updates its guidance.
Resources

 Advertising Disclaimer 
Sign In or Create an Account
