
 
 
 
 The diagnosis of childhood, teenage and young adult (CTYA) cancers was disrupted during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, with large reductions in diagnoses and an increase in intensive care admissions, suggests a UK data analysis. We already know that the COVID-19 pandemic led to worrying delays in diagnosis and treatment for many adults with cancer, so we wanted to understand how the pandemic affected childrens cancer services, said study presenter Dr Defne Saatci, a DPhil student at the University of Oxford, UK, in a press release.  
 What this study shows, for the first time, is concerning, but obviously important evidence around the impact of COVID-19 on these diagnoses of cancer in children and young people. 
 
 Referring to the high rate of intensive care admissions, Dr Scales added: We know that early diagnosis is really important for cancer outcomes, and so any delay in diagnosis can have an impact on patients. For the study, the team examined data from the nationally representative QResearch general primary care database to assess diagnoses of CNS tumours, lymphoma, leukaemia, sarcoma and renal tumours in CTYA individuals. These were linked to hospital admission, mortality and cancer registry data. Incident cancer diagnoses between 1 February and 15 August 2020 were compared with those of the three preceding pre-pandemic years. Professor Hippisley-Cox explained they chose these diagnoses as they were only able to focus cancers we had sufficient numbers to carry out analyses on. In all, 2607 CTYA cancers were diagnosed between 1 January 2017 and 15 August 2020, of which 380 were identified during the COVID-19 pandemic. There was, overall, a 17% reduction in the incidence rate ratio of CTYA cancers between the pandemic and earlier years. The largest decreases in diagnoses were seen for CNS tumours, at -38%, and lymphoma, at -28%. Compared with previous years, childhood cancers diagnosed during the pandemic were significantly more likely to have intensive care unit admissions, at an adjusted odds ratio of 2.2 (95% CI 1.33 to 3.47). The median time to diagnosis was not significantly longer during the pandemic than in previous years, with an average increase of 4.5 days. However, the median time to treatment was significantly shorter during the pandemic, at an average reduction of 0.7 days (95% CI -1.1 to -0.3]. Professor Hippisley-Cox said they could not identify a reason for this reduction. However, she underlined: It is important to note that the median time to treatment was shorter only by 0.7 days, which is statistically significant but may not be clinically significant. Pamela Kearns, a member of the NCRI Childrens Group and professor of clinical paediatric oncology at the University of Birmingham, UK, who was not involved with the study, commented in the press release that we need to better understand the reasons why the COVID-19 pandemic had such an impact on the diagnostic pathway for CTYA cancers, which will be multi-factorial. Professor Kearns added: There are good treatments available for the majority of children and young people with cancer, but early diagnosis is vital. Kate Collins, chief executive of the Teenage Cancer Trust, said: Too often, young people with cancer are forgotten or overlooked, especially in data collection, making them invisible in the system. The fact that the pandemic has delayed diagnosis is an enormous concern. It is essential to understand not only the reasons why the pandemic affected diagnosis but the impact this is having on children and young people with cancer, and what they need now from the healthcare services who care for them.    The study was funded by the University of Oxford.     No relevant financial relationships declared.     NCRI Festival: Abstract 3439. Presented November 12.   Follow Medscape on  Facebook ,  Twitter ,  Instagram , and  YouTube . 
 To continue reading this article ... or Continue reading your article with a Medscape account Join the Top Medical Resource for Physicians Today. Free Membership! 
 
 0   Read Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1 2  Next 
 
 2021WebMD, LLC   
 Send comments and news tips to  uknewsdesk@medscape.net . 
 
 
 Cite this: Liam Davenport.CancerDiagnoses in Young People Hit by COVID-19 Pandemic- Medscape -Nov12,2021. 
 
 TOP PICKS FOR YOU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
