
 
 
 
 Despite objections from the American Psychiatric Association (APA) and other national groups, federal regulators are sticking to the November 15 deadline for the modified  clozapine  risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) program. The modifications will require all those who prescribe and dispense clozapine to be recertified.  Prescribers and pharmacies who fail to be certified by this date will no longer be able to prescribe/dispense the drug 
 In a September  letter  to the FDA, the coalition pushed back, writing that it is "unreasonable to deny prescribers of this data that they entered. Furthermore, the lack of historical data could result in harm to patients in some circumstances." The coalition asked the FDA to intervene and ask the drug's manufacturers to reinstate prescriber access to the information. 
 
 In a response to questions on this issue from  Medscape Medical News , the FDA said in a written response the historical data had not been lost, but would be maintained "for record-keeping purposes." The FDA also said agency officials met on October 10 with members of the professional organizations who authored the letter to hear their concerns about the clozapine REMS program. The CPMG, which has the responsibility for implementing the REMS, was also represented at the meeting, the FDA said. "Based on concerns raised by stakeholders, the CPMG has recently begun to address some of the concerns raised in the letter including updating the prescriber/prescriber designee relationship and enrollment process to allow for a designee to be affiliated with multiple prescribers," the FDA told  Medscape Medical News . "The recent updates also enable prescriber designees to self-enroll/create credentials, send affiliation requests to prescribers, and attest/perform functions on behalf of prescribers. It is our understanding that the CPMG is disseminating this information to stakeholders," the agency added.   Bigger Burden, Bad Timing   In an interview with  Medscape Medical News , Robert Cotes, MD, who serves as a member of the clinical expert team for Serious Mental Illness Adviser, a joint initiative of the APA and the  Substance Abuse  and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), said the changes to the clozapine REMS will likely increase the administrative burden on clinicians, Cotes said. In the letter to the FDA, the APA and other groups in the coalition expressed concern about patient status forms, which are five pages long. The coalition has requested that the FDA develop a form where clinicians can submit monitoring results on multiple patients at one time, with PDFforms presented in a fillable format. "The concern is that if the workflows become more laborious for people, it could result in treatment interruptions for individuals on clozapine or potentially it may steer prescribers away from using clozapine for people who may need it," said Cotes. Also commenting for  Medscape Medical News , Raymond C. Love, PharmD, professor and vice chair at the University of Maryland School of Pharmacy, emphasized the poor timing of the switch to a new clozapine REMS. "Pharmacies are overloaded right now due to COVID tests and  influenza  and COVID boosters and COVID vaccinations for kids," making it a tough time to manage the demands of the clozapine REMS re-enrollment, he said.   Kerry Dooley Young is a freelance journalist based in Washington, DC. She is the core topic leader on patient safety issues for the Association of Health Care Journalists. Young earlier covered health policy and the federal budget for Congressional Quarterly/CQ Roll Call and the pharmaceutical industry and the FDA for Bloomberg. Follow her on Twitter:      @kdooleyyoung       Follow Medscape on  Facebook ,  Twitter ,  Instagram , and  YouTube .   
 To continue reading this article ... or Continue reading your article with a Medscape account Join the Top Medical Resource for Physicians Today. Free Membership! 
 
 5   Read Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1 2  Next 
 
 
 Credits: Lead Image: Dreamstime 
 
 Medscape Medical News2021WebMD, LLC   
 Send comments and news tips to  news@medscape.net . 
 
 
 Cite this: FDA Stands Firm on Deadline for Clozapine REMS Recertification- Medscape -Nov12,2021. 
 
 TOP PICKS FOR YOU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
