
 
 
 
 The idea of add-on tricuspid  valve repair  at the time of mitral valve surgery makes sense because severe  tricuspid regurgitation  (TR) is associated with a poor prognosis, and reoperation on the tricuspid valve has a high  perioperative death rate .  Guidelines therefore recommend concomitant repair of mild or moderate tricuspid regurgitation with annular dilatation of 4. 0 cm or more 
 The second core problem with the results is that even if you believe that reducing progression of TR at 2 years was clinically relevant, the cost for this more favorable ultrasound measurement was a 5-fold higher need for permanent pacing. I implant  pacemakers  and love what they do for people, but I would argue that avoiding a pacemaker at a young age is a far better outcome than avoiding an unfavorable Doppler signal on an ultrasound. Imagine, as the editorialists did, if the composite endpoint included pacemaker implantation. This clearly would not favor add-on tricuspid valve repair. Proponents of add-on tricuspid repair will argue that even though there were no differences in functional status or quality of life, having worse TR may lead to problems in the future. Indeed, that is  the  question. But the only way to know that is to recruit many more patients, follow them longer than 2 years, and measure clinical outcomes, not surrogate endpoints. There was discussion during the session and in the editorial that surgical trials are more difficult to conduct than drug trials, and that is why we need surrogate endpoints such as TR progression. I would agree that surgical (and procedural) trials create more challenges relative to drug trials, but I disagree that proper surgical trials cannot be done. In fact, the CTSN group has shown that it is possible to do larger trials. They recruited 2100 patients in a multicenter  trial  of rate vs rhythm control after cardiac surgery. And the recent  LAAOS III trial  recruited more than 2300 patients to study add-on left atrial appendage closure. The latter study measured the hard endpoint of  stroke  and went out to 4 years.    Conclusion    This latest CTSN trial confirms that tricuspid repair at the time of mitral valve surgery increases the risk for pacemakers in young patients with mild-to-moderate TR. Whether that harm will be outweighed by fewer adverse clinical outcomes in the future remains unknown. Sadly, despite a high-profile presentation at a big medical meeting and a publication in the  New England Journal of Medicine , patients, cardiologists and surgeons still do not know whether doing more rather than less at the time of mitral surgery is worth it.    John Mandrola practices cardiac electrophysiology in Louisville, Kentucky, and is a writer and podcaster for Medscape. He espouses a conservative approach to medical practice. He participates in clinical research and writes often about the state of medical evidence.     Follow  John Mandrola on Twitter       Follow theheart.org | Medscape Cardiology on  Twitter       Follow Medscape on  Facebook ,  Twitter ,  Instagram , and  YouTube     
 To continue reading this article ... or Continue reading your article with a Medscape account Join the Top Medical Resource for Physicians Today. Free Membership! 
 
 0   Read Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1 2  Next 
 
 2021WebMD, LLC   
 Any views expressed above are the author's own and do not necessarily reflect the views of WebMD or Medscape. 
 
 
 Cite this: John M. Mandrola.Questions Remain on Tricuspid Repair at Time of Mitral Surgery- Medscape -Nov13,2021. 
 
 TOP PICKS FOR YOU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
