
 
 
 
 A  new study  published in  BMJ Open  adds to the evidence that  zinc  is effective against viral  respiratory infections , such as colds.  Jennifer Hunter, PhD,BMed, of Western Sydney University's NICM Health Research Institute, New South Wales, Australia, and colleagues conducted a meta-analysis of 28 randomized controlled trials (RCTs).  They searched 17 English and Chinese databases to identify the trials and then used the Cochrane rapid review technique for the analysis 
 
 
 The trial could not provide answers about the comparative efficacy of different types of zinc formulations, nor could the investigators recommend specific doses. The trial was not designed to assess zinc for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19. 
 
 
 
 Dr Aamer Imdad 
 Asked for independent comment, pediatrician  Aamer Imdad, MBBS , assistant professor at the State University of New York Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York,told  Medscape Medical News,  "It's a very comprehensive review for zinc-related studies in adults" but was challenging because of the "significant clinical heterogeneity in the population." 
 
 Imdad explained that zinc has "absolutely" been shown to be effective for children with  diarrhea . The World Health Organization has recommended it since 2004. "The way it works in diarrhea is that it helps with the regeneration of the epithelium.... It also improves the immunity itself, especially the cell-mediated immunity." He raised the question of whether it might work similarly in the respiratory tract. Imdad has a  long-standing interest  in the use of zinc for pediatric infections. In regards to this study, he concluded, "I think we still need to know the nuts and bolts of this intervention before we can recommend it more specifically." Hunter said, "We don't have any high-quality studies that have evaluated zinc orally as treatment once you're actually infected and have symptoms of the cold or  influenza , or COVID." Asked about zinc's possible role, Hunter said, "So I do think it gives us a viable alternative. More people are going, 'What can I do?' And you know as well as I do people come to you, and [they say], 'Well, just give me something. Even if it's a day or a little bit of symptom relief, anything to make me feel better that isn't going to hurt me and doesn't have any major risks.' So I think in the short term, clinicians and consumers can consider trying it." Hunter was not keen on giving zinc to family members after they develop an RTI: "Consider it. But I don't think we have enough evidence to say definitely yes." But she does see a potential role for "people who are at risk of suboptimal zinc absorption, like people who are taking a variety of pharmaceuticals [notably  proton pump inhibitors ] that block or reduce the absorption of zinc, people with a whole lot of the chronic diseases that we know are associated with an increased risk of worse outcomes from respiratory viral infections, and older adults. Yes, I think [for] those high-risk groups, you could consider using zinc, either in a moderate dose longer term or in a higher dose for very short bursts of, like, 1 to 2 weeks." Hunter concluded, "Up until now, we all commonly thought that zinc's role was only for people who were zinc deficient, and now we've got some signals pointing towards its potential role as an anti-infective and anti-inflammatory agent in people who don't have zinc deficiency." But both Hunter and Imdad emphasized that zinc is not a game changer. There is a hint that it produces a small benefit in prevention and may slightly shorten the duration of RTIs. More research is needed.   Hunter has received payment for providing expert advice about traditional, complementary, and integrative medicine, including nutraceuticals, to industry, government bodies, and nongovernmental organizations and has spoken at workshops, seminars, and conferences for which registration, travel, and/or accommodation has been paid for by the organizers. Imdad has disclosed no relevant financial relationships.     BMJ Open.  DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-047474.  Full text     Judy Stone, MD, is an infectious disease specialist and author of  Resilience: One Family's Story of Hope and Triumph Over Evil  and of  Conducting Clinical Research , the essential guide to the topic. You can find her at  drjudystone.com  or on Twitter  @drjudystone .     For more news, follow Medscape on  Facebook ,  Twitter ,  Instagram , and YouTube.   
 To continue reading this article ... or Continue reading your article with a Medscape account Join the Top Medical Resource for Physicians Today. Free Membership! 
 
 20   Read Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1 2  Next 
 
 
 Credits: 
 Lead Image: Getty Images 
 Image 1: Bourke Street Clinic 
 Image 2: SUNY Upstate 
 
 Medscape Medical News2021   
 Send news tips to  news@medscape.net . 
 
 
 Cite this: Does Zinc Really Help Treat Colds?- Medscape -Nov08,2021. 
 
 TOP PICKS FOR YOU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
