
 
 
 
 Should doctors seeking healthcare disclose that they are a doctor? 
 For example, @drhelenrainford commented: "In my experience my care is less 'caring' when they know I am a [doctor]. I get spoken to like they are discussing a patient with me  no empathy just facts and difficult results just blurted out without consideration. Awful awful time as an inpatient but that's another story!" @Dr_B_Ring said: "Nope  You and I speak different jargon  I would want you to speak to me like a human that doesn't know your jargon. My ego would get in the way of asking about the acronyms I don't know if you knew I was a fellow physician." Conversely, @lozzlemcfozzle said: "Honestly I prefer to tell my Doctors  I've found people skip explanations assuming I 'know,' or seem a little nervous when I tell them!" Others said they felt uncomfortable  pretentious, even  in announcing their status, or worried that they might come across as expecting special care. "It's such a tough needle to thread. Want to tell people early but not come off as demanding special treatment, but don't want to wait too long and it seems like a trap," said @MDaware. Twitter user @MsBabyCatcher wrote: "I have a hard time doing this because I don't want people to think I'm being pretentious or going to micromanage/dictate care." Replying to @MsBabyCatcher, @RedStethoscope wrote: "I used to think this too until I got [very poor] care a few times, and was advised by other doctor moms to 'play the doctor card.' I have gotten better/more compassionate care by making sure it's clear that I'm a physician (which is junk, but here we are)." Several of those responding used the words "tricky" and "awkward," suggesting a common theme for doctors presenting as patients. "I struggle with this. My 5-year-old broke her arm this weekend, we spent hours in the ED, of my own hospital, I never mentioned it because I didn't want to get preferential care. But as they were explaining her type of fracture, it felt awkward and inefficient." said @lindsay_petty. To avoid the awkwardness, a number of respondents said they purposefully use medical jargon to open up a conversation rather than just offering up the information that they are a doctor. Still others offered suggestions on how to broach the subject more directly when presenting as a patient: '"Just FYI I'm a X doc but I'm here because I really want your help and advice!" That's what I usually do," wrote @drcakefm. @BeeSting14618 Tweeted: "I usually say 'I know some of this but I'm here because I want YOUR guidance. Also I may ask dumb questions, and I'll tell you if a question is asking your opinion or making a request.'" A few others injected a bit of humor: "I just do the 14-part handshake that only doctors know. Is that not customary?" quipped @Branmiz25. "Ah yes, that transmits the entire [history of present illness]," replied Winter. Jokes aside, the topic is obviously one that touched on a shared experience among healthcare providers, Winter commented. The Twitter thread she started just "blew up." That's typically a sign that the Tweet is relatable for a lot of people, she said. "It's definitely something that all of us as care providers and as patients understand. It's a funny awkward thing that can really change an interaction, so we probably all feel pretty strongly about our experiences related to that," she added. The debate begs the question: Is there a duty or ethical reason to disclose? "I definitely think it is very reasonable to disclose that one is a medical professional to another doctor," medical ethicist  Charlotte Blease, PhD , told  Medscape Medical News . "There are good reasons to believe doing so might make a difference to the quality of communication and transparency." If the ability to use medical terminology or jargon more freely improves patient understanding, autonomy, and shared decision-making, then it may be of benefit, said Blease, a Keane OpenNotes Scholar at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts. "Since doctors should strive to communicate effectively with every patient and to respect their unique needs and level of understanding, then I see no reason to deny that one is a medic," she added." Knowing how to share the information is another story. "This is something that affects all of us as physicians  we're going to be patients at some point, right?" Winter commented. "But I don't think how to disclose that is something that was ever brought up in my medical training." "Maybe there should just be a discussion of this one day when people are in medical school  maybe in a professionalism course  to broach this topic or look at if there's any literature on outcomes related to disclosure of status or what are best practices," she suggested.   Sharon Worcester is an award-winning medical journalist at MDedge News, part of the Medscape Professional Network.     For more news, follow Medscape on  Facebook ,  Twitter ,  Instagram ,  YouTube , and LinkedIn     
 
 To continue reading this article ... or Continue reading your article with a Medscape account Join the Top Medical Resource for Physicians Today. Free Membership! 
 
 98   Read Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   1 2  Next 
 
 Medscape Medical News2021   
 Send news tips to  news@medscape.net . 
 
 
 Cite this: Should You Tell Your Doctor That You're a Doctor?- Medscape -Nov09,2021. 
 
 TOP PICKS FOR YOU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
