Nov. 12, 2021 -- About 100,000 pounds of raw ground chicken patty products, which are mostly sold at Trader Joes, are being recalled for potential contamination The recall includes two frozen chicken products: Trader Joes chile lime chicken burgers and spinach feta chicken sliders. The sliders are also sold at other grocery stores. The affected products might be contaminated with extraneous materials, specifically pieces of bone, according
to a recall alert
from the U.S. Department of Agricultures Food Safety and Inspection Service. The USDA said the problem was discovered by the manufacturer, Innovation Solutions, which is based in Kent, Washington. The company received consumer complaints reporting findings of bone in the chicken burger product. The affected products were produced between Aug. 16 to Sept. 29 and shipped to retail locations nationwide. The recalled products have the establishment number EST. P-8276 printed near the USDA mark of inspection. Consumers can also check packages for specific lot codes from the recall notice. The notice includes 1-pound cardboard packages with four pieces of Trader Joes chile lime chicken burgers and 9-pound bulk boxes with 72 pieces of spinach feta chicken sliders.
So far, there havent been any confirmed reports of adverse reactions due to consumption of the products, the USDA said. At the same time, the agency expressed concerns that some products may be in consumers freezers. Consumers who have purchased these products are urged not to consume them, the USDA wrote. These products should be thrown away or returned to the place of purchase. Trader Joes
posted a notice
about the recall on its website, which includes an image of the chile lime chicken burgers box and the product lot codes. All potentially affected product has been removed from sale and destroyed, according to the notice. If you purchased any Chile Lime Chicken Burgers, please do not eat them. We urge you to discard any product or return it to any Trader Joes for a full refund.